# Ayebare_et-al
An environmental habitat gradient and within-habitat segregation enable co-existence among ecologically similar bird species


Abstract

Niche theory predicts that ecologically similar species can co-exist through multidimensional niche partitioning. However, due to the challenges of accounting for both abiotic and biotic processes in ecological niche modelling, the underlying mechanisms that facilitate co-existence among competing species are poorly understood. In this study, we evaluated potential mechanisms underlying the co-existence of ecologically similar bird species in a biodiversity-rich transboundary montane forest in east-central Africa by computing niche overlap indices along an environmental elevation gradient, diet, forest strata, activity patterns, and within-habitat segregation across horizontal space. We found strong support for environmental habitat niche partitioning, with 55% of species pairs having separate elevational niches, suggesting that abiotic habitat partitioning is an important mechanism of species co-existence for at least of half of interacting bird species. For the remaining species pairs that exhibited similar elevational niches, we found that within-habitat segregation across horizontal space and vertical foraging forest strata provided the most likely mechanisms of species co-existence. There was less support for niche partitioning across diet and activity patterns. Overall, we found that the co-existence of ecologically similar species within a highly diverse montane forest was determined primarily by abiotic factors (e.g., environmental elevational gradient) that characterize the Grinnellian niche and secondarily by biotic factors (e.g., vertical and horizontal segregation within habitats) that describe the Eltonian niche. Co-existence mechanisms among potentially competing species influenced variation in abundance by combining at different spatial scales (fine through broad) and extents in niche space. Thus, characterizing distinct niches for ecologically similar species requires accounting for multiple potential niche axes of community structuring.

